Feature/add mesh guide (#4081)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/best-practices/how-we-mesh/mesh-2-structures.md

---
title: "Deciding how to structure your mesh"
description: Getting started with dbt Mesh patterns
hoverSnippet: Learn how to get started with dbt Mesh
---

## Exploring mesh patterns

> Building a dbt Mesh is not a one-size-fits-all process. In fact, it's the opposite, it's about customizing your project structure to fit _your_ team and _your_ data. Often we've had to fit the data team and project structure into our company's org chart, or manage everything in one project to handle the constraints of our data and warehouse. dbt Mesh allows us to mold our organizational knowledge graph to our organizational people graph, bringing people and data closer together rather than compromising one for the other. Let's explore some language for discussing the design of these patterns.

Reviewer: > Often we've had to fit the data team and project structure into our company's org chart, or manage everything in one project to handle the constraints of our data and warehouse

this sentence hit my ear a little weird -- seems like the main idea is how we structured dbt project(s) but the first clause seems to talk about shaping teams.

> ## Vertical splits

Reviewer: is it worth calling these project splits or DAG splits? I think it could be worth calling out what a split even is in the first paragraph just to give a sense of what these sections will be comprised of

- **Isolating earlier models for security and governance requirements.** Separating out and masking PII data so that downstream consumers can't access it is a common use case for a vertical split.
- **Protecting complex or expensive data.** If you have a large or complex model that's expensive to run, you might want to isolate it so that it's safer from accidental selection and easier to debug when it has issues.

## Horizontal splits

Horizonal splits are about splitting up the data based on source or domain. Let's consider some possibilites for horizontal splitting.

- Often the horizontal separation will be based around team consumption patterns, such as splitting out marketing data and financial data.
- Another common vector of horizontal splitting is data from different sources, such as click event data and transactional ecommerce data. These splits are often based around the shape and size of the data and how it's used, rather than the security or governance requirements.

## Combining these divisions

- These are not either/or techniques, you can and should combine them in any way that makes sense for your organization.

> - **DRY applies to underlying data not just code.** Regardless of your split, you should not be sourcing the same rows and columns into multiple meshes. Working within a mesh structure it becomes increasingly important that we don’t duplicate work, which creates surface error for conflicts and erodes the single source of truth we're trying to create in our dbt project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **DRY applies to underlying data not just code.** Regardless of your split, you should not be sourcing the same rows and columns into multiple projects within a mesh. Working within a mesh structure it becomes increasingly important that we don’t duplicate work, which creates surface error for conflicts and erodes the single source of truth we're trying to create in our dbt project.
```

Reviewer: I think that's synonymous with what you had -- presume you didn't mean other groups of projects?

---
title: Deciding how to structure your dbt Mesh
description: Getting started with dbt Mesh patterns
hoverSnippet: Learn how to get started with dbt Mesh
---
## Exploring mesh patterns

> When adopting a multi-project architecture, where do we draw the lines between our projects?

Reviewer 2: switch between "you" and "we" throughout, suggest sticking to "you"
```suggestion
When adopting a multi-project architecture, where do you draw the lines between projects?
```

> How should we organize our data workflows in a world where instead of having a single dbt DAG, we have multiple projects speaking to each other, each comprised of their own DAG?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How should you organize data workflows in a world where instead of having a single dbt DAG, you have multiple projects speaking to each other, each comprised of their own DAG?
```

> Adopting the dbt Mesh pattern is not a one-size-fits-all process. In fact, it's the opposite! It's about customizing your project structure to fit _your_ team and _your_ data. Now we can mold our organizational knowledge graph to our organizational people graph, bringing people and data closer together rather than compromising one for the other.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adopting the dbt Mesh pattern is not a one-size-fits-all process. In fact, it's the opposite! It's about customizing your project structure to fit _your_ team and _your_ data. Now you can mold your organizational knowledge graph to your organizational people graph, bringing people and data closer together rather than compromising one for the other.
```

While there is not a single best way to implement this pattern, there are some common decisions points that will be helpful for you to consider.

At a high level you’ll need to decide:

- Where to draw the lines between your dbt Projects -- ie how do you determine where to split your DAG and which models go in which project?
- How to manage your code -- do you want multiple dbt Projects living in the same repository (mono-repo) or do you want to have multiple repos with one repo per project?

> ## Define your project interfaces by splitting your DAG

Reviewer 2: I left "let's explore some language" and "let's look at some examples" because it flows pretty well.

The first (and perhaps most difficult!) decision when migrating to a multi-project architecture is deciding where to draw the line in your DAG to define the interfaces between your projects. Let's explore some language for discussing the design of these patterns.

### Vertical splits

Vertical splits separate out layers of transformation in DAG order. Let's look at some examples.

> - **Splitting up staging and mart layers.** to create a more tightly-controlled, shared set of components that other projects build on but can't edit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Splitting up staging and mart layers** to create a more tightly-controlled, shared set of components that other projects build on but can't edit.
```

> - **Isolating earlier models for security and governance requirements.** to separate out and mask PII data so that downstream consumers can't access it is a common use case for a vertical split.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Isolating earlier models for security and governance requirements** to separate out and mask PII data so that downstream consumers can't access it is a common use case for a vertical split.
```

> - **Protecting complex or expensive data.** to isolate large or complex models that are expensive to run so that they are safe from accidental selection, independently deployable, and easier to debug when they have issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Protecting complex or expensive data** to isolate large or complex models that are expensive to run so that they are safe from accidental selection, independently deployable, and easier to debug when they have issues.
```
